---
layout: post.vto
tags:
  - agile
  - meetings
  - process
  - project
  - management
  - standup
type: guide
title: The Standup Guide
description: Done correctly, standups can both move your project forward and be a daily opportunity for your team to connect and celebrate
date: 2023-12-30
draft: true
---

## What is standup and why do we call it that?

Standup is an agile technique that was designed to get everyone aligned -
usually once a day. Some other common names for this include "daily", "sync",
and "scrum".

> [!INFO]
> 
> The term "standup" is an on-the-nose reference to the fact that some teams would literally stand for the duration of the meeting as a way to encourage everyone to keep it short - usually less than 15 minutes.

[preview](https://www.atlassian.com/team-playbook/plays/standups/)

## Why most folks don't love standup

Standup as it is commonly practiced can be rote, repetitive, and thanks to
modern project management tools... *redundant*.

Be honest, _how easy is it for you to zone out while people rattle off their
todo list when it largely doesn't impact you_? This is how most people feel in
standup based on the years of feedback I've received.

Most of us are just waiting for our turn to speak and our brain is hibernating
otherwise.

Other feedback I've received (and experienced) is that if you, as an individual
contributor, are expected to update a board with every item you are working on
then a status update is essentially reading a diff of that board to your team.

This feeling of "proving what you did" and "showing what you will do" lacks
trust - especially for established teams. For most contributors it says _I
didn't see you yesterday but... pop quiz... are you working on the right things
today_? As a leader, this is not a message you want to start every day with.

With the above sentiments taken into account, I often hear that standups do not
yield 15 minutes worth of valuable insights and therefore its hard to justify
disrupting a whole team's time for it. This can lead teams to experiment with
async standups or skip the process altogether.

In my experience, async standups are, often times, even worse. Now, rather than
reading the board out loud, you need to write down a summary of what changed.
Many project management tools have this built in and if not, its incredibly easy
to automate so why are we asking our teams to do this for us?

If you work with engineers and they know something could be easily automated and
its not, they get frustrated. Layer in that this could-be-automated message has
an undertone of micromanagement and you have a ticking time bomb of resentment.

What about that other format I mentioned at the top - "walking the board"?

Walking the board can be more useful, but without a plan it is quite literally
like reading a slide deck to your audience. What value are you adding that they
could not have added on their own? If you are going to get an entire team
together, you need to be consciously adding value to each and every person's
day.

## How to make standup feel valuable to everyone

The most important question to answer is:

> What matters today and why?

If you can answer that clearly and succinctly in front of your team, that alone
justifies a message being sent out but perhaps not another meeting on the
calendar.

After years of leading standups I can confidently say this question can never be
answered frequently enough, loudly enough, or clearly enough. Most teams have a
machine gun of priorities, requests, fires, and more being shot at them
throughout the week. Having someone in a leader role clearly articulate the #1
priority of the team (or each individual) is always appreciated, even if it was
assumed or guessed correctly.

## How to tailor a standup to your team

For a complete guide, check out the [Standup Playbook](/playbook-standup).

[preview](/posts/playbook-standup)

## Helpful resources from around the web
